===============
 Dennis Sciama
===============

Chapter 4 of the book has the title, *Sciama's Principle*.

It is central to the story, indeed at the end of the chapter it is
stated that one of the aims of the book is to reawaken Sciama's
approach to dynamics.

The Weak Sciama Principle
-------------------------

::

   A mass m at distance r from P rotating with angular velocity w
   contributes a rotation of kmw/r to the inertial frame at P.

   k is a constant.


Gravitational Waves
-------------------

A rotation is just two orthogonal oscillations.

Imagine an ocean with waves running in two directions.  A cork bobbing
on the waves, goes round in circles.

Electrons orbitting protons.

Energy emitted as photons comes from electrons changing energy levels.

Think of a particle of dust, somewhere along the outer edges of
galactic spiral arms.

The dust is bathed in the Cosmic Microwave Background.

It has a temperature of 2.73K.

There are a lot of rotations around.   The Sciama Principle should
apply to atoms too, electrons, protons, etc.

And indeed it does!

Call S the Schwartzchild radius.

If you want to know the wavelength emitted, just go with the
Schwartzchild radius.

An electron has S = 4.58e-61 * M_sun.

Now, regarding the CMB, the universe is full of dust which is all at a
temperature of 2.73K.

This dust mediates the oscillations in the CMB.


ramblings
=========

The Sciama principle is incredibly compelling.

Having the Sciama principle as an axiom is super helpful, as it helps
bootstrap everything.

You can ask, "what would happen if this is so?".

But in the end, some explanation is needed for how it all works.

All the dust in the universe must help thermalise the CMB.

And each dust particle plays by the Sciama Principle.

This also provides a natural mechanism for the Rees-Sciama effect, as
well as the Sciama Principle.

Indeed, I would suggest that no exchange of momentum takes place
unless a photon encounters some matter. 

It is not hard to see how the whole effect may be mediated by the CMB
and the cosmic dust.

It is the energy in the gravitational wave generated by the giant
black hole that causes a galaxy to spin and emit energy, sucking in
the surrounding dust and blasting it back out in spiral arms.

The inflow of dust has to match the outflow along the spiral arms.

So the energy emitted should be commensurate with the energy in that
wave. 

So as the light travels across the cosmos it gains energy from the
wave.  This would explain the Hubble tension: the CMB we see is
boosted by the GWB - but it would need an explanation of why only the
CMB is affected in this way, not all the light we see.

Presumably, dust at at temperature of 2.73K is a perfect absorber and
emitter for microwaves.

It is claimed that the incoming flow adds very little to the CMB, most
of the energy arriving as GRB.  So it does correspond to the expansive
flow.

Why do I get to ignore redshift when estimating the GWB, but not when
I am dealing with the CMB?

Because of the way the contracting flow GWB adds to the overall
GWB?

jonny


Axioms.
* Perfect Copernican Principle* Sciama Principle* Universe is big and old and lots of things are in remarkable equilibrium.


