==============================
 The Geometry of the Universe
==============================

A bold claim for a magnificent book, published July 2021.

`The Geometry of the Universe`_ covers every important aspect of
modern cosmology: dark matter, the Big Bang, general relativity,
Mach's Principle, black holes, quasars, galactic rotation curves and
gamma-ray bursts.

It makes some very bold claims, and backs them up with very strong
philosophical arguments, rigorous mathematics, and a wonderful
historical account of how we got where we are.

Written by Colin Rourke, emeritus professor of mathematics at the
University of Warwick.

In many ways it is the antidote to the biggest selling book on
theoretical physics, *A brief history of time*.   Time is central to this
story of geometry.

Stephen Hawking went out of his way to avoid mathematical formulae in
his book, believing that every equation had the potential to halve his
audience.

Colin Rourke takes the approach of splitting the book into three
parts.  The first three chapters are intended to be accessible to a
wider audience, this is followed by a more technical treatment in the
followin chapters, with six appendices of yet more technical detail.

Chapter 1, leads us on a journey from the ancient Greeks to Einstein
and it is only page 8 before we are introduced to some geometry.
Diagrams showing triangles 

`gotu.triangle`



Recently retired after completing 50 years of lectures.

His interests were in topology and he had a particular interest in the
Poincaré Conjecture. 

Poincaré very much plays a part in the story told in the book.

The conjecture is about 3-dimensional spaces and states::

  Every simply connected, closed 3-manifold is homeomorphic to the
  3-sphere.

For our purpose, the conjecture says any 3-dimensional space is the
same as a 3-sphere, provided the space has certain properties.

For an excellent guide to the 

The theorem was eventually proven by Grigori Perelman in 2006.

Knowing that the theorem holds, we can proceed forward knowing that if
part of the universe has the qualities described in the conjecture,
then it is essentially a 3-sphere.  As such, it is highly symmetric.

Locally, we can construct frames of reference that locally of a
3-sphere of space dimensions composed with a dimension of time

This is what de Sitter space is, more on this below.

The first two chapters of the book introduce a cast of some 20 or more
key characters in the story.  Some familiar names: Kepler, Newton,
Einstein.

It becomes clear that there were many others very heavily involved in
the evolution of theories.  There was considerable debate about many
aspects of modern cosmology that finally lead to the adoption of
hypotheses such as the Big Bang.

Fred Hoyle, an advocate of a static universe, coined the phrase Big
Bang, mocking the idea.  

One of the less known characters in the story is Willem de Sitter, who
came up with the concept of de Sitter space, as a solution to
Einstein's general relativity equations.

It is, in-fact, a sphere, a 4-sphere, 3 of space, with a dimension of
time interweaved.

The book proposes that de Sitter Space is a natural model for the
universe.  Indeed, it is generally accepted that the universe is
entering a de Sitter phase.  One of the book's key arguments is that
it has in fact likely been in such a state for a very long time
indeed.

It is, in fact, the simplest possible model, essentially being just a
sphere.

It is a vacuum solution to Einstein's general relativity.

A key observation is that modern cosmology is in fact ignoring
precisely half of de Sitter space.

`The Geometry of the Universe`_ tells a compelling tale explaining how
we arrived at that situation, whilst shining a bright light to the way
ahead. 

Appendix F. does an analysis of pairs of geodesics in de Sitter
Space.  Imagine one geodesic is an observer bound to some spiral
galaxy and the other geodesic is a distant galaxy, arriving at the
edge of our observalbe universe.

It is shown that any such galaxy is seen red-shifted for all but a
small, finite time, creating an extreme case of observer selection
bias: we only see a source blue shifted for a small, finite time of
the infinite time it is visible to us.

Hence our observations are dominated by red-shifted sources and we
consequently mis-interpret the small sample of blue-shifted signals,
such as gamma-ray bursts.

Growing evidence that the big bang is a mistake is presented.  Fully
formed spiral galaxies are visible in the Hubble deep field, just a
few hundred million years after the supposed big bang.

Each time we are able to gaze further out into space we keep seeing
more of the same:  deep space looks pretty much like our local
neighbourhood of space. Galaxies as far as the lenses can see.

It is going to be interesting to see what the James Webb Space
Telescope reveals when it is launched later this year.

One way forward is to ask what an essentially infinite space filled
with galaxies would actually look like?

This is essentially what is done in the book.  Imagine a universe with
galaxies way beyond the Hubble distance.  At the centre of each galaxy
a giant, rotating black hole.  What would it all look like?  What
effect would these distant, giant rotating mass have on our frame of
reference?


This subject is introduced with a discussion of Mach's Principle.
Ernst Mach, another important member of the cast, criticised Newton's
hypothesis of a universal inertial frame as having no basis in
reality.

He proposed that all assumptions about space and time should have
their origin in observable quantities.

As the book notes, there are lots of ways to interpret Mach's
principle.  

Rourke provides a mechanism for Mach's principle by proposing that
rotating masses drag the nearby inertial frames coherently with the
rotation.

More specificly, that the effect is proportional to the mass of the
body and drops of linearly with distance.

With this assumption, he is also able to reproduce galactic rotation
curves without need for dark matter.

With that not inconsiderable problem cleared up, it is time to get
back to Einstein.

At the end of Chapter 1, it is recommended that readers take a look at
Appendix A.  It is indeed worth a visit, as special and general
relativity are central to the story.

Not only does the appendix cover a complex subject in just a few
pages, it does so in a way that highlights how the equations of
general relativity change when the rotational frame dragging is added
to the picture.

Amongst the formula in the appendix there are some wonderful nuggets,
including the staement that that Einstein's biggest blunder was not in
fact his introduction of the cosmological constant, but the
reintroduction of a universal time in his models for the universe in
the large.

This in turn leads to the Big Bang theory.

References
==========

.. _Geometry of the Universe: https://www.worldscientific.com/worldscibooks/10.1142/12195
.. _poincaré_conjecture: http://msp.warwick.ac.uk/~cpr/poincare.pdf
.. _Appendix A: https://www.worldscientific.com/worldscibooks/10.1142/12195

