===============
 Cosmology 101
===============

::
   
   Cosmology is the study of the universe's evolution. It's the
   narrative of the creation of the smallest particles and atoms that
   make up our own bodies and the unseen forces that govern our
   existence. It's the tale of black holes and dark matter, of
   spectacular explosions, and of the quiet, growing dark.

   Join Katie Mack, Perimeter Institute’s Hawking Chair in Cosmology
   and Science Communication, on an incredible journey through the
   cosmos in our new series, Cosmology 101.


This presents an excellent opportunity to outline how the ideas in The
Geometry of the Universe contrast to those of modern cosmology.

There are just two ideas: Sciama Principle and de Sitter Space.

Underlying everything: The Perfect Coperncian Principle.

Introducing: Cosmology 101
==========================

::
   ... it is easy to feel that stars and galaxies and the cosmos itself
   are eternal and un-changing, just fixtures of nature that have
   always been and always will be ...

The field of cosmology is defined as a study of evolution and change.
The field, apparently, does not consider the possibity that the
universe, like de Sitter Space, has the Perfect Copernican Principle,
that it has looked pretty much the same for a very long time indeed.

The belief in a truly ancient universe was shared by Einstein and many
other astrophysicists of his era.  It was one reason for his
introduction of the cosmological constant.

When the Universe was seen to be expanding, he withdrew his
cosmological constant.

In contrast, de Sitter's solution removes the mass term from
Einstein's equation, leaving just the lambda term.

The lack of matter perterbed Einstein, as he had hoped his General
Relativity equation would embody Mach's Principle, providing an
explanation for inertial frames.

In what follows, Dennis Sciama comes to the rescue, with an additional
assumption to General Relativity that re-instates matter, in
particular the distant stars, as the origin of inertia.  More on this
later.


Expansion of the Universe Explained
===================================

The Universe is uniformly, negatively curved.  The geometry of our
universe is non-Euclidean, we live in a Poincare disk world.

In a curved spacetime, each galaxy that enters our visible universe
bursts on the scene highly blue-shifted, before accelerating away and
showing the familiar redshift.

As noted by Robert MacKay, "We see every galaxy redshifted for all but
a small finite part of the infinite time we see it".

In short, red-shift is an extreme example of an observer selection bias.

How do we know it is expanding?
-------------------------------

Distant galaxies all appear to be moving away from us.

Redshift is introduced with the familiar ambulance siren, dropping in
pitch as it passes by.

Note that, an amulanec travelling an appreciable percentage of the
speed of sound, bursts on the scene with a high pitch, but the
high-pitched period does not last long compared to the time we hear it
low-pitched as it travels away from us.

The relationship between distance and redshift is noted to be so exact
that we use redshift synominously with distance and time.

In short, the blue shift observations, in the form of gamma-ray bursts
are being ignored, or rather mis-interpretted as the result of
dramatic events such as neutron star colloisions.


And where is all that space going?
----------------------------------

It is not going anywhere, there is no overall expansion.


Cosmic Microwave Background
===========================

States that any time we look out into the Cosmos, we are looking into
the past.

With the Perfect Copernican Principle, we should expect the past to
look like the present.

Can we see the primordial fire of the Big Bang?

The answer is no, the Big Bang did not happen.

The Cosmic Microwave Background is thermalised radiation from stars in
the universe.
Note that in an ancient universe there has been plenty of time for
regions to communicate, so no problem with the uniformity we see.

Why is it the temperature it is?
--------------------------------

The gravitational waves which create the curvature of the universe
also mean that there is a limit to how far light can get from its
source before it is comprehensibly scattered in both intensity and
direction.

The same scattering also limits the total energy of gamma-ray bursts
and takes some of the intensity out of them.

Based on the temperature of the CMB this distance is likely a handful
of Hubble distances, say six or seven.


What about the harmonics?
-------------------------

Maps of local (<500 million light years) show structure on that scale,
likely due to giant elliptical galaxies with central black holes 10^15
solar masses or more, with around 10^5 galaxies in the local cosmic
web.

The Sciama Principle implies that any two bodies should move towards
harmony, subject to the distance between them.  So galaxies 500
million years apart can follow the same 500 million year oscillation.


Stellar Evolution
=================

The central black holes of active galaxies eject streams of plasma in
jets from the galactic centre.

As the jets travel from the centre, they cool and condense into
population II stars of very low metallicity.

These are short lived and stars forming further out have higher
metallicity.

Note that mature galaxies are could be orders of magnitude older than
the 13.7 billion years of the big bang.  This gives plenty of time for
heavy elements to accumulate in the proportions that we observe.


Galaxy Formation
================

Galaxies grow very slowly over time by acretion of matter by its
central black hole.

Quasars are baby galaxies, often ejected from a parent galaxy.

Note that without the 13.7 billion year time limit, galaxy formation
is much easier to explain.

JWST pictures are mentioned.  Note that the observations were exactly
what is expected in a de Sitter Universe: galaxies as far as you can
see, like the ones nearby to the Milky Way.

Note that looking out into a negatively curved universe is like
wearing glasses to correct short-sightedness: objects appear nearer
and smaller than they actually are.

In the Big Bang theory, this is modelled by the cosmic scale factor,
giving the size of the universe at a given redshift.

In a de-Sitter Universe, it is simply what it is like to live inside a
Poincare disk.

Cosmic Web explained
====================

Copernican Principle: extend to Perfect Cosmological Principle by
including time.

Cosmic web: it is old, together with the Sciama Principle.

Dark matter is back: rotating masses to the rescue.


Cosmic Inflation
================

No big bang, no cosmic inflation.

Also no problem to explain uniformity of the CMB.

Dark Matter Explained
=====================

Sciama Principle.

Galactic rotation curves without need for dark matter.

Assume the rotation of a black hole at the centre of a galaxy causes
the space time around it to rotate.

10^10 or more solar masses required.

Note that Sciama Principle is too weak to affect wide binaries of
stellar mass.

Also Sgr A* is too small to drive a galaxy the size of the Milky Way.
It is suggested that it is a moderate sized quasar, roughly on line to
the centre of the galactic bulge, but not actually the centre, with
the true centre likely twice as far away.

Dark Energy
===========

The evidence for dark energy is the following plot from the Dark
Energy Survey:

image:: images/supernova.png

The observation is that there are some distant galaxies that are not
as redshifted as they should be given their distance.

The conclusion is that the expansion rate of the universe has
increased.

What we appear to be seeing is just what we might expect in a de
Sitter model: the redshift v distance relationship is an asymptotic
relationship, but there are many galaxies that have not yet reached
that asymptote.

image:: images/zvd.png

The End of the Universe
=======================

is likely a very, very long way away.

The Future of Cosmology
=======================

Re-define the subject to admit the possibility that the Universe is
essentially static, but does not appear to be so.

Embrace non-Euclidean geometry and a model that does not have all the
problems outlined in this series.
