===================
 An 18/12 Overture
===================

Today marks the first anniversary of the passing of Professor Colin
Rourke.

I first met Professor Rourke as an 18 year old undergraduate in 1980.
He was my personal tutor.  We rarely spoke other than at the start of
terms, when I would inform him where I was living.

This all changed in 2017 when Rourke published, "A New Paradigm for
the Universe".   A second addition under the title, "The Geometry of
the Universe" was published in 2021.

I began a correspondence with Professor Rourke in 2017.   He showed
great patience in guiding me through his work.   I would send long
emails with speculations about some new observation that I had
discovered and how it might relate to his ideas.

Rourke had an uncanny ability to point me in the right direction with
a few well chosen words.   I miss his words of wisdom every day, I
miss the excitement of receiving a new message and the insight it
would provide.

It has been a difficult year, adjusting to his absence, re-focussing
my efforts on ensuring that Professor Rourke's work gets the attention
it deserves.

I have spent much of the year working on an explanation for
gravitational waves, based on Rourke's model for the universe.  I
believe that the waves we are seeing are not coming from merging
black-holes, rather they are new objects arriving in our visible
universe.  

Rourke's model is based on General Relativity, with the additional
assumption of the Sciama Principle:  a rotating body of mass m induces
a coherent rotation of the surrounding space time of magnitude m/r,
where r is the distance from the body.  He also proposes that the
de Sitter Space solution to General Relativity provides a closer match
to the observations.

This amounts to assuming that space time is not a vacuum, but rather a
medium through which gravitational waves can propogate.

Much of the time, the oscillations of space-time itself can be ignored
and General Relativity alone provides an excellent model.

One year on it seems the astrophysics community is still reluctant to
embrace any model beyond the Lambda-Cold-Dark-Matter Big Bang
universe.

For me, 18/12 will always be a day to remember and celebrate the
magnificent work of Professor Rourke.
