=========================
 A Brief History of Time
=========================

In many ways `The Geometry of the Universe`_ is the dual of Stephen
Hawking's, A Brief History of Time.

Published in 1988, some 30 years have passed, since Fred Hoyle's, `notu`.

Go back another 30 years and Fred Hoyle wrote `notu`_.

These two book give a good reminder of how new a theory the `Big Bang`
theory is, and also the pace at which we are able to make new
observations of the universe.

Black holes were barely discussed by Hoyle.

30 years later, the Big Bang is taken as an assumption and much of the
book is about the similarities between the beginning of time at a Big
Bang.

By 1988, the theory is firmly established, with observations such as
the Cosmic Microwave Background having been taken as confirmation of
the theory.

Hawking mentions the discovery of quasars led to Hoyle abandonning his
continuous creation model.   Quasars are highly red-shifted and so are
assumed to be very distant objects of extraordinary power.   The fact
that we do not see these objects nearer to us is deemed to be an
indication that quasars were an earlier stage of the evolution of the
universe, and hence very much further away.

Fast forward to today, and Rourke shows how quasars could in fact be
relatively close, low power objects, where the emitted radiation is
red-shifted due to the intense gravitational field, in accordance with
general relativity.

Hawking's worked in theoretical physics, focussing on quantum theories
of gravity, and much of the book focusses on quantum effects and notes
similarities between the event horizon of a black hole and the big
bang singularity.

Both Hoyle and Hawking have chapters entitled, "The Expanding
Universe".

Hawking asks four questions regarding the origin of the universe::

  1. Why was the early universe so hot?

  2. Why is the universe so uniform on a large scale?

  3. Why did the universe start out with so nearly the critical rate
     of expansion that separates models that collapse from those that
     go on expanding forever?

  4. Despite the fact that the universe is so uniform and homogeneous
     on a large scale it contains local irregularities, such as stars
     and galaxies.

     What is the origin of these density fluctuations?



