======================================
 The Greatest Science Story Ever Told
======================================

There are many claims to this wonderous title.

`The Geometry of the Universe`_ is without doubt such a story.

It is something I have puzzled about as a child, does it just go on
forever?  What about time?

I recall, around 7-8 years old, black holes were a thing that might
not even exist.

At school, I had a teacher who explained Newton and Einstein, as far
as special relativity.

By the 1990's the universe was expanding, red shift, big bangs, cosmic
microwave backgrounds.

Everything in cosmology seemed to be explained down to the first tiny
fraction of a second, although nobody is sure how it will end.

Or so I thought.

In the 1980's I was a mathematics under-graduate at Warwick
University, with Colin Rourke teaching calculus in his wellington
boots.

Along comes this book that turns everything I thought I knew on its
head.

It is easy to dismiss books making such dramatic claims, why is this
one special?

There are few people with such a deep understanding of the geometry of
space time as Colin Rourke.

Indeed, this is an impediment to better appreciation of his ideas.
There are many books which discuss relativity, but few present the
fundamentals of general relativity as clearly as Appendix A of the
book.

This is one contrast with other science books, the mathematics is
there if you want to see it.


The primary goal of this project is to help act as a guide to the
ideas in the book.




In the book, he patiently explains the geometrical implications of
some simple assumptions about space time and shows that a static
universe does not appear to be static.


















The book carefully explains special and general relativity, a not
insignificant task in of itself.

It distils matters to their essence and assumptions that are made are
clearly articulated.

It is economical with its assumptions and is able to explain all our
observations.

I was lucky enough to be taught by Colin Rourke when studying at
Warwick University in the early 1980's.

His focus was topology, and taught an introduction to calculus, often
wearing wellington boots.

I left Warwick and 

