=================
 A Personal View
=================

I have decided to just keep appending new versions at the top of this
file.

The pictures from the James Webb Space Telescope have been stunning.
They have generated a lot of excitement amnongst astrophysicists.

High redshift galaxies, is the big bang theory wrong?  The word on the
street is that this is just great new data to refine models and find
the missing key to the standard big bang model.

My personal view, recently changed to a belief that the universe

From Peebles,  Anomalies in Physical Cosmology:

   Einstein’s cosmological principle, or assumption, is that the
   universe is close homogeneous and isotropic in the large-scale
   average.

   To be more explicit about the role of this assumption in
   the standard ΛCDM theory used in this paper I offer the following
   definition.

   The theory applies the standard physics of matter,
   radiation, and Einstein’s general theory of relativity with its
   cosmological constant to a cosmologically flat universe that is a
   spatially stationary, isotropic, random process with a close to
   scale-invariant power law power spectrum of Gaussian and
   adiabatic departures from homogeneity.

   This trimmed-down theory has eight free parameters (the density
   parameters in ordinary matter, dark matter, the CMB, and
   neutrinos with negligible rest masses; with Hubble’s constant, the
   primeval Gaussian process amplitude and power law index, and the
   optical depth for scattering of the CMB by intergalactic plasma).

I ask the question, what would a universe with Einstein's cosmological
principla look like?

What if the universe is essentially static, vast and truly ancient.

Suppose that galaxies gradually grow from smaller systems, until they
reach a size that is naturally in balance with the surrounding
universe.

Stirring dust into stars and planets for a very long time indeed.

Over time, quasars can form along the galaxies arms. They may
eventually be ejected from the galaxy and appear as baby galaxies.

These quasars complicate astronomy significantly as they often have
redshift that is due to a large mass at their centre.  Einstein's
general relativity explains how a central mass can slow time
significantly.   This influence can extend out far enough to shift the
light from the active region.

To model a quasar we just need the central mass, and the density and
temperature of the surrounding medium.  JWST can help greatly with the
last two parameters.

It is in general difficult to distinguish a small, nearby quasar from
a more distant galaxy, where all the redshift is assumed to be
cosmological.   The angular size of the objects can clearly help
clarify matters.

With JWST we have high resolution images of nearby galaxies, the
density and temperature of the dust should be much clearer.


Previously
==========

I have been on a journey, and found new perspectives.

It has been a way to see how the world might have changed or not.

Sharing ideas with others, finding out what people are doing and why.
What is the perspective, why do they believe what they do.

It has been a wonderful time in our exploration of the universe we
find ourselves in.

A space telescope at L2, observing the light in the infra red.

I met Norm Newton, just the perfect name.  At a cafe in the Universe,
close to home.

My journey had been shrouded in doubt, was the world quite ready to
know what they see?

It's stunning, it's crisp, with a gravitational twist, all in the deep
infra red.

What's distance, what's frequency as we spin through time.

A mathematician with a furious fascination with the details of
topological space.  Proving beyond, the shadow of a doubt that all
spheres behave in just the same manners.

Yet the deltas exchange and in time build collective understanding.

There's noise everywhere, with some glorious peaks.

When one with such a grasp of how our observations are constrained,
whilst explaing the rhythms in space time.


** Work in progress -- much rambling ahead, for now this is just
random thoughts to be resorted **


Borrowing the title of Fred Hoyle's epilogue to his *Nature of the
Universe*.

My views have changed significantly, since I first became aware of
Colin Rourke's work in cosmology.

It is a curious transformation, in which to fully appreciate the
simplest possible universe, we first have to forget much that we
assume is undoubtedly true.

Light.  Is there anything else?

de Sitter Space is an extremely good approximation to what we see.

It is a vacuum solution to Einstein's equations, with no matter.

Most of the universe, in terms of space, has very little matter.  We
should expect de Sitter Space to be a good approximation, and indeed
it is.

Throughout this space, it is the Cosmic Microware Background that
defines the space.

Where does this orignate from?  With an essentially static universe we
can expect it to be dominated by distant sources.

Assuming the universe is ancient, we can expect waves to form as it is
modulated by the intervening matter.

There are harmonics in the CMB, these are unsurprising, given the
potential age of the universe.  A model should however take these
harmonics into account.

An a particle of dust which absorbs a quantum of light, that is
rotating with the body, will move some distance before the electron
decays and emits the photon.

It will thereby result in an oscillation in the surrounding space time
with the same angular velocity as the body, proportional to its mass,
and falling off linearly with distance.

The drop off is inversely proportional to distance, because the
radiation has a direction, determined by the plane of rotation of the
dust.

The gravitational fog, that blurs our vision around the de Sitter
Radius, obscures the fact that some of the light which makes up the
cosmic microwave background potentially originates from a very long
way beyond the de Sitter radius.

It took me a very long time to appreciate this,  the 13.7 billion year
horizon still being a parameter in de Sitter Space.

The horizon is not an abrupt discontinuity, as would be expected in a
big bang theory, but rather a misty horizon that gives glimpses of the
universe beyond.

The key is to accept the possibility that the universe is very much
older than the window our visible universe appears to give.


Key ideas:

   * a static universe that is essentially unbounded in size and time

   * Most of the universe has no matter and de Sitter Space, a
     solution to general relativity for a universe with no matter,
     appears to be a very good match for our observations.

   * Godel universe: causality issue.

   * Einstein-Cartan theory seems to be essentially the same
     modification to general relativity that Colin outlines in
     appendix A.

     wikipedia currently has the following note:

     Einstein–Cartan theory has been historically overshadowed by its
     torsion-free counterpart and other alternatives like Brans–Dicke
     theory because torsion seemed to add little predictive benefit at
     the expense of the tractability of its equations.

     Since the Einstein–Cartan theory is purely classical, it also
     does not fully address the issue of quantum gravity. In the
     Einstein–Cartan theory, the Dirac equation becomes nonlinear..

   * quantum gravity is really not important in this story. By this, I
     mean, the universe has been in a similar state for so long that
     we do not need to worry about the time when everything was so
     close.  First we need to get an accurate understanding of the
     broad structure of the universe.

   * the *quantum field* is, of course, important, it is just not a
     reasonable objection to a macro theory of gravity.

   * define a sphere around each galaxy, the radius at which
     microwaves dominate the energy.


Why microwave?  Energy lost through curvature, each source can only
contribute a finite amount of energy.

Rate of arrivals of new galaxies.

Balance with outflowing, red-shifted field.

Quasars
=======

These are baby galaxies.   They are often associated with a nearby
galaxy, or indeed embedded within the structure of a full galaxy.

Light from small quasars is typically significantly red-shifted due to
the proximity of the active sphere generating the light to the centre
of the black hole.

General Relativity
==================

The classical solutions to Einstein's equations make no assumptions
about how mass is distributed within a rotating body.

The assumption is that only the total mass affects the gravitational
field and that mass can be assumed to be concentrated at the centre
of the body.

Gravity
=======

A body's affect on the rest of the universe matches the rest of the
universe's effect on the body.

Think about the Earth and the Moon.

Assume that there exists a field that defines an extremely high
frequency oscillation.

The bodies modulate the signal.

Weak Sciama Principle
---------------------

A body of mass M rotating with angular velocity omega induces an
oscillation of the same frequency in the surrounding space.


What is the angular velocity of the Sun?

It appears to rotate in around 27 days, but what other rotations are
there within the Sun?

What about the individual atoms, with electrons orbitting them?


They are rotating too.

Idea
====

Imagine a body such as the Earth and the moon, as the moon orbits the
earth.

It takes a second or two for a wave to make a round trip from earth to
moon.

The moon, conveniently, seems to be rotating with its orbit, always
with the same dark side hidden.

To first order, the oscillations of atoms define the field, leading to
general relativity.

The sum of these oscillations presumably producing a thermal spectrum.

Two bodies a distance r apart are able to accelerate towards each
other by an amount proportional to m_1 * m_2 / (r * r).

How?  Gravity causes each body to reflect back to the other it's
rotation, weighted by the above amount: the product of the two masses
divided by the square of the distance between them.

Each mass reflects back the wave it sees from the other, the size of
the reflection being proportional to the bodies mass, with the effect
dropping off inversely with distance.

For the full round trip that gives the formula above.

The result is that standing waves will emerge, such as the ocean
tides, which allow the bodies to move in harmony.

The fundamental wavelength being r/c.

What I am trying to argue here is that just the "massive bodies
reflect back what they see" -- which is implicit in the Weak Sciama
principle????

So Newtonian Gravity falls out naturally to first order.

Now, note that any body obviously has other rotations than those of
its atoms.

The moon does a full rotation roughly every 28 days, as does the Sun.

Both presumably are seen to earth as rotations, or oscillations,
around that period.

But 28 days is very much longer than the period it takes an atom to
oscillate.

Following Planck's law and assuming the energy a mass generates with a
given wavelength is inversely proportional to the wavelenth, would give
one way to make the various rotations commensurate.

In other words explain why only the oscillations of the atoms need to
be taken into account to get a very good approximation of reality:
General Relativity.

To go to the next level, other oscillations need to be included.  In
the case of a galaxy, there is assumed to be a giant rotating mass at
the centre.



[n] dumbell systems: two roughly equal sized stars.

Implication for black holes:  all the mass concentrated around the
surface?

Oscillations.

Thing of event horizon as the point where light is slowed so it
rotates with the black hole?

Still rotating, you can't unmake your deal with the universe.

By that, having used up energy to rotate really fast you can't crawl
up into a black hole and pretend it never happened, at least that
would require work.  Rather the body just continues as nothing has
happened.


Microwaves can and do mediate the signal?


