=========
 Bingley
=========

.. image:: images/bingley.png


This story begins in the Yorkshire town of Bingley.

It is where I spent my earlier years.  In the image below I am on a
mission to dig a whole to Australia.  Dad had mentioned Australia is
close to the antipodal point, so obviously I had to go there.

.. image:: images/johnny.png

It was a few years later, looking up at the sky and asking mum (or was
it dad) if it goes on forever?  It must stop, but then what comes
next, so maybe it never stops?

It is the same town in which Fred Hoyle spent his early years.  There
is now a road named Fred Hoyle Way.

Mum liked Fred.  I expect she had heard him on the radio.  A blunt
Yorkshireman that was not afraid to tell the establishment he thought
they were wrong.

It was Fred that coined the term Big Bang.  Fred looked at the
Universe through the biggest telescopes of the day.

.. image:: images/m31.png

Like Einstein, he believed the Universe was likely ancient and vast.
He believed in the perfect Copernican Principle: the universe looks
pretty much the same, wherever you are, and has done so for a very
long time.

It can be paraphrased as, "there are no special times or places in the
universe".

Hoyle proposed that the observed expansion could be balanced by the
spontaneous creation of a modest amount of matter, just one atom per
sky-scraper sized volume of space, per year.

The idea never caught on.

You could never ask mum a question she would not attempt to answer.
She usually waited to be asked, before expressing an opinion.

Dad talked about things he was interested in.

I do not recall either expressing an opinion on the Big Bang.

It was definitely my dad that bought the copy of Fred's, The Nature of
the Universe, that I re-discovered in 2017, which was also the year I
learnt of Colin Rourke's work in cosmology.

Back in Fred's time, observations of quasars, by radio telescopes were
interpretted as extremely powerful, very distant objects, from an
early stage of the universe.  Then there was the Cosmic Microwave
Background.

Vera Rubin's discovery that galactic rotation curves are not
consistent with General Relativity gave rise to dark matter.



