========
GW150914
========

The first gravitational wave detection.

I heard about this event during a Python conference in Februeary 2016
at the time of the announcement.

Brandon Rhodes gave a keynote where he mentioned the recent
announcement by the LIGO team and how python was used at key parts of
the analysis.

The detection of these ripples in space time was a stunning
achievement, after decates of hunting.

Two black holes, 35.6 and 30.6 solar masses merge to form a final mass
of just 63.1 solar masses.

Energy emitted as gravitational waves: 3.1 solar masses.

There was a lot of interest at the conference and a number of
attendees with good knowledge of the discovery.

It was not until :ref:`GW170817` that I started to wonder whether the
signals being detected might have another explanation other than the
merging black holes.

By that time I had read Rourke's book.

How to reconcile the Sciama Principle with the Kerr metric?

Rourke uses the Sciama Principle as an addition to General Relativity,
to explain galactic rotation curves without need for dark matter.

The problem for gravitational wave physics that with the Sciama
Principle binary systems are highly stable and there is a limit to how
far they can inspiral.

Fortunately, Rourke also proposes the hypothesis that gamma-ray bursts
may be the arrivals of new galaxies in our visible universe.

Along with Robert MacKay he shows how in a de Sitter universe, new
arrivals burst on the scene highly blue shifted.

It is due to the curvature of space time, each galaxy arrives highly
blue shifted, the blue shift reduces over time, until the galaxy then
starts to accelerate away and converge to a Hubble law.

Now any gravitational waves the galaxy is emitting will be modulated
in the same way.  Perhaps that is what we are detecting?

In a 2018 discussion on black holes there is this fascinating comment
from Colin Rourke::


   There is another possible more important problem that I have with
   black holes.  The fundamental inertial drag hypothesis that explains
   the dynamics of galaxies needs every mass in the universe to have a
   well-defined rotation (or a well-defined inertial frame in which it is
   static).  But the current fiction is that a BH is a POINT SINGULARITY
   and therefore it has nothing to define its rotation.  I mention this
   problem in passing in the book, but I did not stress it because I did
   not want to murder yet another sacred cow.

   
In the merging black hole models it is assumed that the angular
momentum that the two black holes have around each other is lost to
the surrounding universe, in a very brief amount of time.

In the arriving galaxy model, it is the wave from new angular
momentum, in the form of a rotating galaxy or quasar, arriving in our
visible universe.

So instead of masses in the stellar graveyard, we could be seeing
masses in our cosmic birth registry.

The black hole model also has to take account of space-time curvature:
close to black holes, time slows.

Interestingly, the wave front will be shaped by the Kerr metric.  It
is the Kerr metric based frame dragging that creates a wave in space
time.

The key to resolving the Kerr/Sciama paradox is to understand that
both effects apply.

If you know the angular momentum of a body, you can calculate how it
will drag the surrounding space time round with it using the Kerr
metric.

This also gives the angular momentum that will be lost by the body,
and leads to the conclusion that bodies will eventually inspiral.

Now this will create a wave in the surrounding space time, with it's
amplitude dropping off inversely with distance, as assumed in
gravitaitonal wave physics.

In short, the detection of gravitational waves is direct confirmation
of the Sciama Principle, which in terms of the fabric of space-time
can be phrased::

  an oscillation w in space time induces an oscillation of amplitude
  w/r in the space time at distance r.




chirp redshift degenerecy
=========================

Chirp mass 28.6 Suns and at a distance of 430 Mpc.

The wave we observed depends on both the redshift and the source mass.

Suppose we have a chirp mass m, at distance z, then the wave we
observe will be the same as a mass m_0 = m * (1 + z).



ringdown
========

The ringdown phase will be depend on two parameters, theta and
phi. [aside: these will likely have some impact on what the inspiral
looks like???]

theta is the angle of approach, distributed as cos(theta).

phi is the hyperbolic rotation for the arrival, distributed as
sinh(phi) squared.

The same parameters will characterise any accompanying gamma-ray burst
and other observations in the electromagnetic spectrum.


The first multi-messenger event?
--------------------------------

There was a weak burst of gamma-ray energy


And now for the python module
-----------------------------


.. automodule:: gotu.gw150914
   :members:
      
