==============================================
 Institute of Mathematics, Warwick University
==============================================


After my early years in Bingley, I went to study mathematics at
Warwick University.  My personal tutor was Professor Colin Rourke.

He taught undergraduate analysis, using a method he had developed for
the Open University. 

I graduated with first class honours, but it was not until 2017 that I
discovered Professor Rourke's work in cosmology.

He published, "A new paradigm for the universe".  A second edition
under the title, "The Geometry of the Universe" was published in 2021.

In this work he presents a model for the universe with no need for
dark matter and no Big Bang!

I obtained a copy of the book and was enthralled.  As an
under-graduate I had rarely spoken to Professor Rourke, other than to
let him know where I was living.

I plucked up the courage to contact him about the book and to my
immense delight it was the beginning of a wonderful correspondence as
he guided me through his perspective on the universe.

With no big bang, there is also ample time for galaxies to grow, by
slow acretion of matter to their central black holes.  Galaxies
giving birth to baby galaxies, which may one day grow into galaxies
themselves, or a globular cluster perhaps?

The Sciama Principle is proposed, as an addition to General
Relativity, to explain galactic rotation curves without recourse to
dark matter.

The same principle allows central black holes to absorb angular
momentum from inflowing matter and so no need for complex acretion
disk theories.

It is also just a theorem about the propogation of gravitational
waves: that their amplitude reduces as 1/r, where r is the distance
from the source.  This is widely accepted in the community and is
usually used to calculate the distance of the source, usually
expressed as redshift, with a Hubble-law.

Professor Zeeman lecturing about the foundations of mathematics.

Fermat's last theorem.

Group theory.

Linear Algebra

Calculus

Curves and Surfaces

Algebraic Geometry

Algebraic Topology

Professor Colin Rourke

It was not until 2017 that I started to appreciate my extreme good
fortune with having Colin Rourke as my personal tutor.

I had just read Fred Hoyle's, The Nature of the Universe, when I
discovered Colin's work on cosmology.

As such, I came to the ideas as someone with a keen interest in
cosmology, but an open mind to the details.

Indeed, The Geometry of the Universe was my first introduction to
theories of quasar-galaxy evolution.

The idea that small galaxies grow into larger galaxies seems quite
natural.

Ammonite
========

A new Sedna? object.
